# IGV

## Context

In this session we will be looking at how IGV can be used for visualizing mutations in NGS data. In this scenario exome sequencing has been performed on a DNA sample, sequence reads have been aligned to the reference genome (GRCh37) and a variant caller has been run.

Variant calling algorithms are not perfect at distinguishing real variants from artifacts in the data. When we process NGS data to generate variant calls this also generates various metrics for each of those calls which can be useful in determining wheter a variant call is real. However, it is often not possible to interpret these metrics with certainty, and in these cases visual inspection and interpretatin of the read data underlying the variant calls can be the most useful approach to adjust our confidence in the accuracy of the variant calls, and determine if a variant call is real or artifact. Furthermore, complex variation may not be accurately described by the variant caller (or may not be called at all), and visual inspection of the data can be useful to characterise these complex events.

Visual inspection of variant calls usually takes place during either:
 - interpretation of a specific variant in a specific case
 - investigation of non-concordant variant calls during testing/validation of an assay

In the former case, it's important to be able to determine if a called variant is real or not, as this will influence whether additional work is performed to confirm the presence of that variant, and/or whether the variant is reported within the patient result.

In the latter case, visual inspection can provide clues as to the reasons for non-concordance which can aid with troubleshooting and inform the development of improved methods.

In this session we will inspect some regions of the genome where there are possible variants to determine whether these are real events or artifacts. These will include single nucleotide variants (SNVs), small insertions and deletions (indels) and larger structural rearrangements.

Acknowledgement

The material presented here is adapted from https://bioinformatics-core-shared-training.github.io/intro-to-IGV/InspectingVariantsInIGV.html, which was itself adapted from https://github.com/griffithlab/rnaseq_tutorial/wiki


## What is IGV

The Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) is a high-performance, easy-to-use, interactive tool for the visual exploration of genomic data. It supports flexible integration of all the common types of genomic data and metadata, investigator-generated or publicly available, loaded from local or cloud sources.

https://software.broadinstitute.org/software/igv/

In clinical genomics IGV most commonly used to visualise NGS reads, often in the context of other information (e.g. genome sequence, genes, transcripts)


## How to access IGV

IGV is available in multiple forms, including:

 - the original IGV - a Java desktop application
 - [IGV-Web](https://igv.org/app/) - a web application 
 - igv.js - a JavaScript component that can be embedded in web pages (for developers)

For this session we will be using IGV-Web. This runs in a browser, but does not send any data to the host site, so can also be used to view patient data without breaching IG requirements.


# Data
We will be using data generated by sequencing HG002 using an exome sequencing assay. 
HG002 is a sample which as been sequenced by multiple technologies to generate a high confidence variant call truth set. This means that for many regions of the genome we know which variant calls should be present within this sample with a high degree of certainty. By comparing the variant calls in the truth set to the variant calls we have generated for this sample, we can more easily determine which calls are real, and which are artifact.

The data we will be viewing is stored in DNAnexus at https://platform.dnanexus.com/panx/projects/GBVYpp04KXQXgJXK9YFJVXq3/data/

You will also be able to load other data from patient samples and inspect variants within these, but for these you will not have the benefit of a truth set, so will need to interpret the validity of the variant call using only visual inspection.


## How to use IGV


## Data
IGV can visualise many different types of genomic data. We will be using it to display variant calls and the sequencing data which was used to generate those variant calls.

**VCF** Variant calls are stored in VCF files. VCF is the standard file format for describing variant calls\
**BAM** The aligned sequencing reads are stored in BAM files. A sequencing run will generate sequencing reads which each contain a fragment of the target genome, however at this stage we don't know where that fragment belongs in the genome. The reads are aligned to a reference genome to determine their original position in the genome. A bam file contains a description of each sequencing read (the bases and their quality scores) and the location to which that read was aligned to in the genome\
**BAI** These are index files which contain metadata for the bam files. These are needed to enable IGV to quickly search the bam file for the reads which need to be displayed

The data we are using is stored in the cloud. Rather than download the data, we will load it into IGV using a URL, which will stream the necessary data to IGV as you view it. 

URLs can be generated as follows:





We will load data into IGV-Web using 


## Basics
What are you seeing
How to navigate



## Variant inspection/interpretation
Split these?
